My theme is “‘The King of the North’
in the Time of the End.”
In recent years, the Russian government
has persecuted our brothers and sisters
who live in that country.
You’ve heard reports
about the police invading Kingdom Halls
and breaking up meetings.
The government has labeled
Jehovah’s Witnesses
as an “extremist group.”
It has seized our properties
and imprisoned our brothers.
Please watch a brief video
that reviews some of the trials
Jehovah’s people in Russia have faced.
On April 20, 2017,
the Supreme Court
of the Russian Federation criminalized
the activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
As of July 4, 2019,
authorities have progressively
seized 131 of the properties
owned by Jehovah’s Witnesses,
with an additional 60 properties
subject to confiscation.
One of the seized properties
was the former
Russia branch complex in Solnechnoye.
At the time of filming,
the Russian authorities continue
their aggressive attack
on Jehovah’s Witnesses.
As of August 17, 2020,
there were 42 Witnesses
who were in pretrial detention
or sentenced to prison,
32 who were under house arrest,
and 169 who were not allowed
to leave their hometown.
All have been charged with organizing,
participating in, or financing the activity
of a so-called “extremist” organization.
At least 380 Witnesses were,
at the time, under investigation
—ranging in age from 19 to 89 years old.
What has this meant
for the individuals affected?
As an example,
on June 3, 2018,
Brother Sergey Klimov was arrested.
Local authorities initiated
criminal charges against him,
placing him
in pretrial detention for two months.
This detention was extended seven times,
separating him from his wife and family
for a year and five months,
before he was finally tried and sentenced.
On November 5, 2019,
he was sentenced to six years in prison.
Two of our dear young people in Russia,
Brother Yegor Baranov
and Sister Darya Dulova,
are courageously facing criminal conviction
and potential long-term imprisonment.
Brother Baranov is only 19 years old.
When the authorities raided her home,
Sister Dulova was only 18 years old.
By means of the Newsroom on jw.org,
we are informed of updated news events.
This page includes links to name lists
of Witnesses
currently imprisoned for their faith,
which can help us include
them specifically in our prayers.
Our brothers and sisters in Russia
are resolved to remain loyal to Jehovah
despite any opposition,
and they put their confidence
in him in the assurance
that Jehovah is on their side!
It shouldn’t surprise us
that this powerful government
has been persecuting
our peaceful,
law-abiding brothers and sisters.
Why not?
Because that government
is fulfilling Bible prophecy!
Please find Daniel chapter 11.
In verse 40, it refers
to what the Bible calls
“the king of the north.”
Of that “king,” Daniel 11:41 says:
“He will also enter
into the land of the Decoration,
and many lands will be made to stumble.”
Today, Russia and its allies
are filling the role
of the king of the north.
Daniel foretold that this king would enter
“the land of the Decoration,”
meaning that he would interfere
in a significant way
with the activities of God’s people.
As discussed in the May 2020 Watchtower,
Russia and its allies
are not the first political power
to act as the king of the north,
but they may well be the last.
In this program, we will do three things:
First,
we’ll briefly trace
the fulfillment of the prophecy
recorded in Daniel chapter 11.
Second, we’ll look at how that prophecy
is being fulfilled today.
And third, we’ll discuss
how knowing this information
should affect the decisions that we make.
Brother Herman van Selm,
a helper to the Writing Committee,
will help us review
some of the key points of the prophecy
recorded in Daniel chapter 11.
Thank you, Herman,
for helping me with this presentation.
It’s a pleasure to be with you, Ken.
Thank you for inviting me.
First, let’s briefly trace
how the prophecy has been fulfilled so far.
The prophecy in Daniel chapter 11 mentions
“the king of the north”
and “the king of the south.”
Now, why are they described like that?
Well, initially,
these powers were located north and south
of the literal land of Israel,
thus the names king of the north
and king of the south.
These powers could be viewed as two thrones.
Over time, those thrones have been occupied
by various political powers
and these rival kings compete
for world domination.
And what about Jehovah’s people?
They are right at the center
of this conflict.
But let’s start at the beginning.
Ken,
what is the origin
of the kings of the north and of the south?
The kings of the north and of the south
both rose from the empire
established by Alexander the Great.
One line of kings ruled over Egypt,
which is south of Israel.
And that dynasty was the first
to fill the role of king of the south.
During this period, another line of kings
ruled an area north of Israel
and those kings filled the role
of king of the north.
Then the Roman Empire took over
as king of the north.
As discussed in the May 2020 Watchtower,
God’s people are the focal point
of the prophecy
recorded in Daniel chapter 11.
The angel who spoke with Daniel
said that the prophecy
would help him
“understand what will befall your people”
—that is, the nation of Israel.
And what, in fact, happened?
Well, the Jewish nation
was God’s people until 33 C.E.
But after that, a change occurred.
Jehovah poured out his holy spirit
on Christ’s followers.
And from then on,
the congregation of true Christians
became God’s people.
Galatians 6:16 refers to them
as “the Israel of God.”
That point is significant
because the kings of the north and south
can only be identified
when there is a clearly defined group
of God’s people on earth.
Why is that the case?
Because, as we just considered,
the angel had told Daniel
that the prophecy centers on God’s people.
In the second century C.E.,
true Christians were overgrown
by weedlike false Christians.
In his illustration
of the wheat and the weeds,
Jesus foretold that this would happen.
That illustration is recorded
at Matthew 13:36-43.
So from the second century onward,
we can no longer identify
an organized group of true Christians.
And, as we considered, for that same reason,
we also cannot identify
the king of the north
and the king of the south.
But in the 1870’s, a group of Bible students
began to separate itself
from false Christians.
This group,
which included Charles T. Russell,
rejected teachings
that were not based on the Bible.
And like the first-century Christians,
they promoted the truths
taught in God’s Word.
Now this group underwent a development
that is foretold at Malachi 3:1.
They were the “messenger”
who would “clear up a way” before Jehovah.
And as events that followed prove,
this group clearly had God’s backing.
So from the 1870’s onward,
when true Christians began
to organize themselves as a group,
we can again identify the political powers
that fill the roles of the king of the north
and king of the south.
At that time in history,
Britain was the dominant political force
and it filled the role
of the king of the south.
Amazingly, it was also in the 1870’s
that the German Empire emerged
and soon began to challenge Britain
for world domination.
This political power now filled the role
of the king of the north.
Daniel 11:25, 26 indicate
that the two kings would clash
and that the king of the north
would lose many soldiers in the battle.
And that is exactly what happened
during World War I.
And it was during that war
that Britain and its close ally,
the United States,
forged a special bond.
So from this point on,
during these last days,
the Anglo-American power
has been the king of the south.
That brings us to our second point:
How has Daniel chapter 11 been fulfilled
from that time onward
until recent times?
During World War I,
the king of the north
and the king of the south
persecuted those of God’s people
who refused to fight in the war.
The king of the south even threw into jail
those who were taking the lead
in the preaching work.
But let’s take a closer look
at the king of the north.
Has the political power filling that role
changed during the last days?
And how has it treated God’s people?
The identity of the king of the north
has changed three times during the last days.
Starting in the 1870’s
through to the end of the second world war,
the German Empire
filled the role of the king of the north.
In the period leading up to
and including World War II,
it persecuted God’s people without mercy,
imprisoning thousands of our brothers
and killing hundreds of them.
Who replaced the German Empire
as the king of the north?
That’s an important question, Herman.
After World War II,
the Soviet Union took on that role.
It also attacked God’s people,
imprisoning them or sending them into exile.
But, Ken, Daniel 11:34 says
that they—that is, God’s people—
would be “given a little help.”
What’s the significance of that statement?
This passage points forward to the time
when the Soviet Union collapsed.
Although God’s people suffered terribly
under that government,
they were “given a little help.”
In what way?
After the USSR collapsed,
God’s people there could worship freely
for a number of years.
In time, though, Russia and its allies
took on the role of the king of the north.
And like the other powers
that filled the role of king of the north,
this government has continued to oppress
God’s people.
How are our brothers and sisters coping
with the current persecution?
Let’s take a look.
And what you’re going to see
will break your heart
but also strengthen your faith.
At 6:00 a.m.,
my husband and I were woken up
by a loud bang on the door.
As soon as my husband had opened the door,
people burst in shouting,
“Everyone on the floor!”
I saw them taking my husband into the kitchen
and heard them
very aggressively
ordering him to do something.
Then I heard some noise, and I realized
that he was being beaten.
My husband, Feliks, and I
were on our way back from the shopping mall
to the car park.
A jeep with tinted windows
blocked our path, and people
with weapons
jumped out, shouting:
“On the ground!
Don’t move!”
We were thrown against the vehicle.
Feliks was sent
to a pretrial detention facility,
where he spent a year.
From the very first bang on the door,
I began praying to Jehovah
for wisdom, calmness,
and for holy spirit
so that I could make the right decisions
and act in the right way.
And for the whole day, I was praying.
Jehovah answered all my prayers,
and I felt that he was close at my side.
Before each court hearing
when I was very afraid
and felt overwhelmed by emotion
and couldn’t calm myself down,
it was prayer
that helped me to settle down.
When they took us for interrogation,
I started panicking and, at that moment,
I realized that I needed
to meditate on something positive.
So I thought,
‘I need to sing our songs.’
And just one song came into my mind:
“He Will Make You Strong.”
It really strengthened me.
Those words
about how Jehovah gave his Son for us
show he loves us and will never leave us.
Brothers and sisters
pray and tell me
that they are praying for me.
It gives me the feeling that I am part
of a large family.
After the interrogation,
he was sent home.
My husband and I
continue to stick to our spiritual routine.
We continue to conduct family worship,
and we are always in the ministry.
Our brothers and sisters
constantly support us.
They write kind words;
they commend us;
they send us
encouraging scriptures from the Bible.
In September 2019, Feliks was found guilty
and sentenced to three years
in a general regime colony.
When he and the other brothers arrived there,
they were beaten up by officers
from the colony.
Feliks told me
that he prayed
while he was being beaten,
and he noticed that at that moment,
he stopped feeling the pain.
While he is behind bars,
Feliks tries to conduct
family worship with me by letters.
He picks certain themes
and some specific questions.
Then I do research
in the publications
and send back what I find.
The scripture at Isaiah chapter 30
really strengthens me,
where it says that “your strength will be
in keeping calm and showing trust.”
Although I tend to worry,
I understand that calmness is expressed
by fully trusting in Jehovah.
I have become stronger
because thanks to Jehovah,
in a way, I have developed almost a shell
against the difficulties
that used to scare me.
That confidence and faith help me.
Jehovah was with me,
and he will remain
close by me,
and we will be made stronger thanks to him,
and we will get through these trials.
How can we develop courage
like our brothers and sisters in Russia?
Well, we must be convinced
that the prophecies in the Bible
are trustworthy.
As we’ve discussed,
each detail of the prophecy
recorded at Daniel chapter 11
has come true so far.
We must have confidence
that the remaining events
described in that prophecy
will also come true.
We are living in the last days
of the time of the end.
Soon, the nations will fulfill the prophecy
at 1 Thessalonians 5:3:
“Whenever it is that they are saying,
“‘Peace and security!’
“then sudden destruction
is to be instantly on them,
“just like birth pains on a pregnant woman,
and they will by no means escape.”
Then “sudden destruction”
comes upon all parts of Satan’s system.
As you can see on the screen,
Daniel 12:1 says:
“During that time Michael will stand up,
“the great prince who is standing
in behalf of your people.
“And there will occur a time of distress
such as has not occurred
“since there came to be a nation
until that time.
“And during that time
your people will escape,
everyone who is found written down
in the book.”
That leads us into our third point:
How should knowing the information
that we have just discussed
affect the decisions that we make?
Well, what we have reviewed
is not just interesting history;
it’s a dramatic prelude
to what will soon happen here on earth.
Jehovah has given his people this knowledge
so that we can act on it.
It should influence the choices we make.